# Two mountains remainder

One difference between us was that he had never read *Principles* and its analysis of catastrophism and uniformitarianism in geology. I was guided to Lyell’s monograph by Stephen Jay Gould, a regular contributor to the *American Naturalist*[^1]. I developed a love for biology and natural history. I was borrowing scientific tomes from the public library. This explained some of the particulars, but the difference between us seemed to be a matter of heart.

Under the influence of that friend and that mountain, I heard God questioning me for the first time. In Grandby Colorado, during the last week of this cross-country bicycle tour, I sat in a pew and asked Jesus if following him really meant something different than following Buddha or living for money, intellect, or sex. I needed to know if there really was a difference—if what one chose to believe mattered—because my spiritual search seemed to be yielding little more than mental anguish. I was ready to give up the arduous task of seeking God.

At the age of 22, I began reading Scripture. When I read the Bible, I heard God speaking. In less than a year I was convinced that I really did believe that Jesus was the Son of God. I came to be under the impression that I should make a public confession and be baptized. Two decades later – I am now 47 – I still have a living faith. I “do science” for a living. “And I think that I, too, have the Spirit of God.” But does this qualify me to write about these matters, or to attempt to persuade others? Nearly everything I know about theology I have obtained through the devotional reading of Donald Bloesch, Thomas F. Torrance, and Karl Barth. Most of what I know about natural history I learned from Stephen Jay Gould.

To be sure, an inner dialogue between science and religion (or the lack thereof) has occupied my idle moments for as long as I can remember. Does this qualify me to write about science and faith? I have a bachelor’s degree in biology from M.I.T. and a Ph.D. in biophysics from U.C. Davis. I am a professor at William & Mary with an active research program at the interface of mathematics and biology. I am a professional scientist. Does this qualify me?

If you look past my office desk and monitor you see my personal scientific library, stacks of primary literature on cellular biophysics, and binders of research notes. I am not an evolutionary biologist. But if scientific expertise is important to writing a good essay on the relationship between science and faith, what about theological competence? I have read theology devotionally – again, for as long as I can remember – but I have no seminary training or academic credentials in any humanistic discipline. I am a professional scientist but an amateur theologian, not to be distinguished in the latter regard from any thoughtful person. So as I consider this essay about science and faith, I ask myself if the fact that I am not a theologian does not disqualify me again.

But perhaps academic credentials are not consequential for a personal perspective on science and faith. Perhaps it is sufficient that I identify as both a scientist and a believer. Perhaps technical expertise of any kind is not required to promulgate a Christian view of science – this is, at least, the impression one gets from religious bookstores. It is possible that the purpose of my essay is simply to share the longings of a broken heart, *to express a hope that our faith would be thoughtful and that science would be decoupled from atheism*. But if knowing and loving God is all that is required to have one’s outlook encapsulated by a Christian publishing house and fed to a credulous church, then before swallowing you might ask if I have a personal relationship with science. For is not the glaring deficiency of most Christian writing on science a lack of scientific credentials? Sometimes we must say, as politely as possible, you really don’t know what you are talking about. But more often the shortcoming of Christian views of science is a palpable disdain for science. There is little enthusiasm for the systematic study of the physical and natural world. The author is not in the business of making or explaining observations of any kind. One senses a passion for debate and demolition, but no tenderness toward nature or intellectual courage. There are no open questions. There is no mystery to be solved. There is no unearthing and no discovery.

When I read Christian perspectives on the creation-evolution struggle I find myself thinking that before *I attempted to redeem science, I would ask if I truly loved it.* Do I care about science? Is it more than a profession to me? Is it more than a field or method or a habit of mind? If anyone thinks he has a reason for confidence in this regard, I have more: science is in my blood; science was my first love. I was born in Silicon Valley, the son of a mechanical engineer and analytical chemist who designed gas chromatographs for Hewlett-Packard. My earliest memory of a children’s book includes a fold-out of a motoneuron axon drawn to reveal that a single cell can be the length of one’s arm. I have a scar on my thumb where I accidentally cut myself as a child and exclaimed “Look, I can see my cells!” In first grade I dissected a frog found dead in our spring house; I chopped it in half with a hatchet and cried because my dull instrument revealed no organs. In fourth grade, I spent Saturdays with my dad at the “plant,” the research and development wing of Hewlett-Packard’s Palo Alto division. I discovered John Conway’s mathematical “Game of Life” and wondered if the universe was a vast cellular automaton. I read the Scientific American “mathematical recreations” column, taught myself BASIC, and programmed an HP9830 desktop calculator to play Conway’s game of Life. As an undergraduate at MIT, few of my friends liked science or engineering—their goal was to demonstrate analytical skills and land a job in the financial sector—but I was made for science. Science has always been part of me. Yes, it is insane to talk like this, but the point is that I am confident that I love science enough to write about it.

Do I love Christ? For some readers, the answer to this question will be important, because it is presumed that one’s presuppositions and faith convictions dramatically alter one’s perception of the world, especially a subjective and politically charged subject like the creation-evolution debate.

So what follows is a position statement, or a confession of belief, regarding a set of interconnecting issues related to the scientific method, Biblical interpretation, the creation-evolution struggle, the visible and invisible Church — and women and reading.

I was the designated keeper of the logs of our trip, but I also kept a personal journal during the eight weeks that we bicycled 3000 miles through the Northwest United States. Todd and I had been in a public library earlier that day. I found an essay that was discussing the virgin birth and the possibility that Jesus was the son of a Roman soldier and his mother Mary. Todd was not impressed with that theory. Later in the day—one of our days off when we weren’t bicycling—we found ourselves eating sandwiches in front of a picturesque natural scene.

[^1]: Check this.
